---
title: "Reflection on my Sixth Semester at UC Berkeley"
date: 2015-05-16
---

_This was originally posted as a Facebook status and is presented without
revision._

My sixth semester at Berkeley is over. When I started the semester, I said "yes"
to a lot of things. All of them sounded exciting, and I thought that I could
take on the challenge and do fine. It turned out that I couldn't, at least not
without sacrificing the quality of my work.

Between tutoring, peer advising, two research projects, and three nontrivial
technical classes, I never gave myself the time or energy to focus on anything.
Even a lot of little things can pile up. In my classes, I didn't bother to play
around or tinker with the material enough to really understand it and gain
essential insights. I just tried to finish my work up as soon as I could because
there were always more deadlines just on the horizon. At the end of the
semester, I found myself despising the material from any of my classes whenever
I had to think about it, even though I would have found it perfectly fine and
probably interesting in less stressful circumstances. My research and teaching
suffered from a lack of devotion and energy left for them after dealing with my
classes. As an undergraduate in these fields, while you can skate by with doing
less, I feel that such a commitment isn't worthwhile unless you really put in
the effort -- and I didn't. My work was subpar for the most part, and I'm
honestly disappointed in myself.

I also ended up questioning whether I'm cut out for a career involving research.
While I can appear competent in bashing out code and equations, I have yet to do
well at something without pressure, without significant guidance, or without
someone telling me what to work on. My intuition and insight are outright poor
for the more mathematically rigorous subjects I've encountered, which puts me at
a disadvantage for contributing to machine learning and statistics. I still
intend to apply to PhD programs in computer science (or closely related fields)
in the fall, but I've been wondering whether going into industry as a software
engineer or data scientist might be a better fit for my abilities and
personality. A downside is that even though there are a lot a jobs for software
engineers right now, it's very easy to end up being a cog in the system, working
on projects of minimal (or even negative) benefit to humanity, and I'm afraid of
falling into that trap. As my college career starts to come to a close, this
dilemma is becoming more important, so hopefully I've have more insight by the
end of this summer.

Despite my whining above, there were definitely good things in my semester. Peer
advising and answering academic advising questions via email/Facebook made for
great pressure relief when I was overwhelmed by technical work, and I think (I
hope!) I ended up helping a good number of people. I managed to get the
opportunity to spend my summer getting paid to do research in computational
neuroscience, which I'm pretty excited about, since I know approximately zero
actual neuroscience, other obligations won't weigh me down, and I get to explore
a new city. (OK, maybe Pittsburgh isn't the best, but you make do with what you
have.) I discovered that I like Earl Grey tea more than I thought I did (thanks,
Asha!), and I experimented with cooking more than before (partially to
procrastinate on work), producing meals both surprisingly good and
disappointingly mediocre, but always enjoying myself. Finally, I couldn't have
made it through without friends willing to tolerate my existence, even when I
complained incessantly about homework (while avoiding working on it) or
tormented them with terrible singing. (Thanks to all of you!) Even with all my
work surrounding me, there were still rays of light shining through, and I'm
glad I was able to find some of them.

All in all, this semester has been educational in some sense, but I certainly
would not choose to live through it again. It was an experiment in piling on too
many commitments, more than I could reasonably handle, and it failed miserably.
We'll see if I learn my lessons; the final semesters of my undergraduate career
draw near, and I really should make the little time I have left in college
count.
